In this video we'll learn
about the c++ while loop.
The while loop is an example of a
pre-test loop because the test is
done at the beginning of the loop.
So it's possible that if the
test fails immediately, then the
loop body will never execute.
The syntax for the while loop
is the keyword while, followed
by an expression in parentheses.
This expression has to
evaluate to a Boolean value.
This is followed by the statement
or statement blocked to execute if
the expression evaluates to true.
In this slide, we can see a simple
while loop that's simply counting.
We have a looping variable named
i and we initialize it to 1.
The loop condition is i
less than or equal to 5.
So as long as i is less than
or equal to 5, we continue
executing the loop's body.
In the body of the loop,
we display the variable i
and then increment it by 1.
Eventually, i become 6, and
the loop condition fails.
And the loop terminates.
It's important that we increment
i in the body of the loop.
If we don't, then the loop will never
terminate since i will always be 1,
which is less than or equal to 5.
This is called an infinite loop,
and it's not usually what we want.
I'll talk about infinite loops in a
later video in this section because
sometimes they can be useful.
Let's see another example.
Let's write a while loop that displays
the even numbers between 1 and 10,
just as we did with the for loop.
In this case we, declare i and
initialize it to 1 since this is
where we want to start looping.
Then in the loop condition,
we'll check to see if i is
less than or equal to 10.
So in other words, we will loop
while i is less than or equal to 10.
And then at each iteration, we
execute the body of the loop.
In this case, we have an if statement
that uses the modulo operator
to see if it's an even number.
If it is, then we display
it, then we increment it.
Note that we increment i regardless
of whether it's even or not.
Eventually, I becomes 11
and the loop terminates.
Let's see another example of
using a while loop with an array.
In this example, we're using a
while loop to iterate over an array.
The array is named scores.
And it's an array of three integers.
We set the integer I to 0
since array indexes begin at 0.
And we loop while I is less than three
as we've done in other array code.
In the loop body, we display
scores sub I then increment I.
When I becomes 3, the condition
fails and the loop terminates.
Loops are commonly used in programming
to provide input validation.
In this example, we want the user
to enter an integer less than a 100.
If they don't, we want to ask
them again and again and again
until they enter a valid integer.
So we declare variable name
number and initialize it to 0.
Notice now how we prompt the user
for the integer and read it from
the console before the loop begins.
Now we have the value
they entered in number.
The loop condition is now evaluated.
And if the user's number is not
greater than or equal to 100,
then we have a valid number
and we never go into the loop.
We simply print the
thanks message at the end.
However, if the user enters an
integer that is greater than or
equal to 100, we go into the loop
and ask for another integer read
it in and then we test again.
This will continue until the user
enters a number less than a 100.
Notice that we have some
duplicated code here.
We have the same output and
input statements outside the
loop and inside the loop.
This is usually a clue that
the code could be better.
We'll make this code better
in the next video when we
discuss the do while loop.
But this kind of code
is commonly seen.
Let's see another example.
In this example, we ask the user
to enter a number between 1 and 5.
Notice the code is very similar to our
previous example with the exception
of the condition in the loop.
In this case, we're testing both ends.
So if the number is less than
or equal to 1, it's not valid.
We also test number greater than
equal to 5, which is also invalid.
If either of these conditions is
true, then the number is invalid.
So that's why we use
the logical or here.
In this example, we'll use a Boolean
flag to control our while loop.
First, we declare a Boolean
variable named done, and we
set it initially to false.
The idea is that when this
variable becomes true, then the
user entered a valid number.
So the loop test while not done,
not done will be true since we set
it to false, so we enter the loop.
In the body of the loop, we prompt
the user for a number and read it.
If the number is not valid, we
display an error message and loop
again since done is still false.
If the number is valid, we display
thanks and set the done flag to true.
Now the loop condition will
fail and we exit the loop.
There are many ways to write logic
and to achieve the same outcome.
Always remind yourself
of the kiss principle.
Keep it simple stupid or keep
it short and simple or keep
it simple and straightforward.
However, you want to think of it.
Basically, don't be too clever.
Keep your code as simple as possible.
Let's head over to the IDE and see
some other examples of the while loop.
I'm in the section 9 workspace
in the while loop project.
What I want to do is write a couple
of while loops some that count down,
one that counts up and a couple
of more, more complicated ones.
In this case, I've already
written one that counts down.
So the idea is we ask the user
to end positive integer to
start the countdown and then
we start the countdown and we
blast off when we get to one.
So if they type in 5, we'll
say 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 blast off.
Okay.
So let's walk through this
code so you can understand it.
First thing we're doing is we're
defining that num right up here.
That's where the user is going
to enter the number into.
And let's say they entered a 3, so
they're going to enter the 3, and
we're going to store it in num.
So I've got num over here,
and its value is 3 right now.
Now we check this condition
is 3 greater than 0.
Well, that's true.
So we execute the output statement,
which says just display num,
and I'll do that over here.
So I'm doing the display of
3, and then i decrement num.
Remember, when it's all alone
on a line like this, the
pre-decrement in a post-decrement
means exactly the same thing.
So I just change num from a 3 to a 2.
I go back up and test the condition
again is 2 greater than 0, it is.
I output the num which is 2.
And then i decrement it to 1.
I'll check the condition again
is 1 greater than 0, it is.
So I'll display the 1.
Then I decrement this to a 0.
And I check the
condition one final time.
In this case, 0 greater
than 0 is not true.
So I stop, and I end up executing that
line right after the loop blast off.
So what we end up with
is 3, 2, 1 blast off.
Okay.
So that's a good way
to walk through it.
And what we'll do is we'll run this.
And let's do it with the 10.
And there you can see the
code going 10, 9, 8, 7, 6,
5, 4, 3, 2, 1 blast off.
Okay so now let's write a
while loop that counts up.
So I'll comment this code out
right here, and I'll paste some
code that I've already written
to save a little time, and
let's walk through this code.
In this case, notice that I'm defining
again declaring and defining this
same variable num to be an integer.
I ask the user to enter a positive
into integer to count up 2.
So in this case, I want to count
from 1, 2., whatever they typed in.
And I'm reading then.
So again suppose they typed in a 3.
So now I've got num and
its value here is 3.
I can't do what i did up here with
just a single variable because
I don't want to change num.
Num is my target as to
where I'm going to stop.
So i need another counting
variable or a looping variable.
In this case, I want to use I.
So I've got I over here.
And I'm initializing i to
1 because that's where i
want to start counting at.
So I becomes 1.
All right.
Now we do the loop.
We test the condition is num
greater than or equal to i.
So is 3 greater than or
equal to 1, in this case.
This is true so what we do
is we display i, and I'll
do the display over here.
We'll display i, which is
1 and then we increment I.
So now I is 2.
We do the loop condition again
is num, which is 3 greater
than or equal to 2, it is.
We execute the body of the loop,
so we print out I, which is now 2.
Okay, I hope you guys are with me.
I increment I, I now becomes 3.
Then i go back up and I test
the loop again
is num which is always going to be 3.
Is num greater than or equal
to three,
it is, right. 3 is equal to 3.
I want to output I again. I is 3
and then I increment I.
Now I becomes 4.
We'll test one more time. Is 4
greater than
or -- sorry is 3 greater than or equal to 4.
it is not.
So it fails at this point.
Now we come down here, and
whatever statement would
be here, we would execute.
Okay.
So you can see that walking through
these examples is pretty easy to do.
It's kind of time consuming,
but once you get used to the
logic, you can pretty much
do a lot of it in your head.
Okay.
So let's do another one now.
And I'll clear this up, and
I'll comment this all out again.
So in this case, what we
want to do is, we want to
do some input validation.
And I've written the code again.
Let me paste it in and
let me indent all this.
I don't know why it
puts it all flush left.
There we go.
Okay.
So we've got an integer here
called number that we've declared,
and we've initialized it to 0.
And we're asking the user to
enter an integer less than 100.
And we're reading that into
that variable number, right.
Now we want to loop, remember, we
want an integer less than a 100.
So we want to loop while that number
they entered is not less than a 100.
So we could say not less than a 100
or greater than or equal to 100.
Either case, will work here so.
In other words, if the number
they entered is greater than or
equal to 100, it's not valid.
So in that case, we'll just ask them
to enter an integer less than 100.
Again, we're prompting them to
enter it, and we're reading it.
And then we're just checking
that while statement
over and over and over.
When this condition fails, that's
when we have a valid number.
Okay.
So let's run this, and we'll
print out thanks when we have
a valid number at the end.
So let's run this you
see what it looks like.
Let's say I want to
integer less than 100.
Let's do it correctly, we'll
type in 50, and we get a thanks.
But if we run it and type in a number
that's not less than 100, let's
say we typed in 120, it prompts
me again I'm in the loop now.
So let's say 115, 1000, it'll
just keep going forever until
I type in a valid number.
And basically, this is the
basics of input validation.
So 99, that's valid thanks.
Okay.
So there you go.
You can walk through this the same way
that I walked through the other one.
Notice that you can write this
condition in here a lot of different
ways, right because greater than or
equal to 100 or not less than 100.
Okay, so there's different ways that
you can write that condition.
And you'll see it all
kinds of ways out there.
All right, so the last example I want to do is
one using a flag -- a Boolean flag
to do input validation so let me
comment this out and I'll copy that
code in real quick okay so there's
the code now we're going to walk
through this real slow and in detail
so you can see what's going on this
is a common use case and this is the
kind of code you see out there a lot.
So in this case we've
got a flag called done.
And we're initializing it to false.
False means that we're not done right
we still need to get more input from
the user for whatever reason either we
haven't started yet or they've entered
something illegal or out of range.
And I've got this variable right
here that I've declared here called
number that's the integer that's
what we're going to read into.
Now it's important that we set
that flag to false to begin
because that's how we're getting
into this loop the first time.
So don't just leave that to true
or just don't leave it to nothing
and take a chance that it is false.
Explicitly set it to false
because that's going to get us
in that loop the first time.
So the first time we're going
to say while not done well it
isn't done right it's false.
So we're in here and we ask the user
to enter an integer between 1 and 5.
And they type the number right there.
We're going to store it
in the variable number.
Now we do a check.
If the number is less
than or equal to 1.
Remember, we want numbers.
There's the 4, here's the 5.
So we want numbers
between there, right.
So we want 2, 3 or 4.
1 and 5 are not valid in this case.
So if the number is less than or
equal to 1, in other words the
number is over here somewhere or
the number is greater than or equal
to 5, so the number is over here
somewhere, then it's out of range.
So we simply display
out of range try again.
Notice how we didn't
change the done flag.
The done is still false, right.
So at this point, we just
executed that statement.
We don't do the else part and we
loop right back up to here, right.
Done is still false.
So we're going to go right back
into the loop and output again
enter an integer between 1 and
5, grab the integer and so forth.
Now when you do type an integer that's
in range, suppose we typed in a 3.
Then this if statement fails
here and we go to the else.
And all we're doing
here is saying, thanks.
And then we set that flag to true.
This is like super,
super important here.
Don't forget to do that.
That means we are done so when we loop
back up again here, that condition
fails, and we're out of the loop.
Okay.
So hopefully, you can walk through
this and just take it a step at
a time and really understand it.
The challenge exercise at the
end of this section is a pretty
tricky and hard challenge.
But it uses this kind of logic
to ensure that you've got input
validation and you're going to
prompt the user every time that
they are not in range, right.
So let me clear this and
let's run this example.
So we're going to enter an
integer between 1 and 5.
Let's say we type 1.
1 is not valid.
We want it to be between 1 and 5.
Again, 2, 3 or 4.
So that's no good.
5 is no good.
70 is no good, right.
Negative 12 is no good.
So let's give it something good.
Let's give it a 3.
Something that's right
in the middle, thanks.
So you can see that using this
kind of logic is better than using
this sort of logic, where you've
got a statement repeated here and
then the same statement over here,
and you've got duplicated code.
We don't have that here.
And the reason we don't have
that here is because we're
using that flag to really decide
whether we're in the loop or not.
Now in the next video, we'll
talk about a do while loop,
where we're doing the condition
at the end and that makes
this kind of code even nicer.
Okay, so that's the end of this video.
Please try these examples yourself,
come up with your own versions
of them, and walk through them
so that you really understand
the logic, and what's going on.